# Learning Rust
Learning some Rust using the AOC 2024 puzzles up to day 10 (easier ones)

* Day 1 and 2: Just learning how to get a file in and do anything with Rust
* Day 3: Added in testing in the Rust way. Added a lib file with tests on a part1 and part2 function with the example input. Then piped my individual input to the tested part1 and part2 functions from the main file. Since the VS Code debugger seems... imperfect, I am ending up with a lot of debug prints. Will have to think of a way to deal with that or to better use the debugger
* Day 4: I seem to have figured out the debugger, so I am able to look for my logic errors that way
* Day 5: Good practice fixing type errors and a move error. I could do fewer passes through the input, but seems fine. I had a logic error with the multiple after pages case, but fixed. For part 2 I did some code copy and a clone because it was just easier, but should have done a refactor if it was something real. Also would have refactored the testing to not repeat the file read if it was something real. Even more, I could have been more efficient in part1 by doing an outer loop break when detecting a bad line after fixing my initial logic error. Maybe I can fix all this later if I need some additional practice content
* Day 6: Changed tests to only read in from the test file once for both part tests. This was harder than I expected it would be and I don't know if I really needed the once_cell crate that the LLM suggested I use there. However, since tests run in parallel, maybe I do?  
Part 2 I just did a brute force replacement of all "." cells. This worked, but I needed a --release compile to get it to run in a few seconds. This is probably a good place to both improve the logic and parallelize. I also need to start reading the solutions of others as it took a long time to get all the typing correct while knowing the approach just fine. I need to see how other "Rustations" do this

I did go and look at some code for AOC from others doing it in Rust. There are a number of folks doing speed optimization in the language and that was interesting to read about. I think I will continue on to Day 10 and then maybe go back and refactor them. Even though others seem to have less testing with less overhead, I think I will stick with that for now as it seems to fit well

* Day 7: For now, just did a bunch of clones and no short circuit for going over the target. On the refactor I will do those and make it parallel. I tried to stick to usize and I think that resulted in less casting and the final numbers would not have fit in u32 anyway. It takes a couple seconds for part 2
* Day 8: I still had to fix a bunch of items to get things to compile, but it seemed to go much smoother with less stumbling with typing. I'm sure it could be improved, but it finished quick and there was no cloning. I rebuilt some data types that I could have carried from part1 to part2, but that seems minor
* Day 9: Brute force part 1 was fine and didn't take too long. Part 2 was still brute force with a little early exit. It took a bit to get the stepping and loop exits correct, but worked and didn't take too long in run time. Might rewrite with a different structure when I come back through to refactor. I think my Part 2 code was a little hard to follow
* Day 10: Part 1, I was looking for a chance to use petgraph and compare with the use of NetworkX with Python. NetworkX and Python is much easier to use. I will see if petgraph is a bunch faster when I go back and refactor the days and compare to whatever I did in Python.  
Part 2: I had a good idea. Seemed to work and was able to just use petgraph's neighbors in a fixed length loop. May not have really needed a graph library for this day, but it was good to learn a bit about petgraph

## Reflecting, Refactoring, and Timing
Now that I have a tiny bit of Rust experience and am almost done going through [The Rust Programming Language](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/) book, I am going to read what I did in Python for the same AOC days, compare, time them and refactor a bit.

* Day 1: My Rust code is not quite twice as long (60 lines) as my Python code (36 lines). I did the same approach in each for part 1 which was to turn each column into a list, sort them and walk through. I did a singly nested for loop in Python for part 2, but in Rust I made a HashMap (would have been a Dict in Python) so that I would only have to walk the list once and saved the counts. So this is not a perfect comparison of approach between the two and I wanted to do the Rust implementation from scratch for these, so that is expected. In some cases, I may refactor to get a better match with the Python for the timing comparison. I will start with just a simple timing of the parsing and the algorithm without the part that reads in the input. So a string will have already been created from an input file, but not parsed yet.  
```
        Python      Rust(debug) (release)   in milliseconds
Part1   0.786       1.794       0.0122
Part2   50.96       0.685       0.0037
```
So I ran each twice and took the second run timing to allow caching to help, but no fancy averaging or anything. Interesting that Python seems to be able to compete with the Rust debug timing in part 1 where the approach is the same. However, if you let Rust optimize, it's not even close as Rust is 64 times faster. The Rust approach for part 2 should be faster as long as using a bit more memory is not to expensive, and so it seems with Rust faster in either case and over 13,000x faster with the better approach and release optimized
* Day 2: ...